## Proposal for “A Formal Approach to Data Recycling”

### Issue Statement:  
Data has become ubiquitous in the modern world, and specialized field such as Data Science and Informatics have emerged to extract insights from this deluge. For the area of Biological Science in particular, high-throughput and automated tracking technologies produce much more data than can be analyzed by groups that specialize in investigating biological mechanisms. One short-term solution to this proliferation has been to store data in repositories for public consumption. While this follows from the principles of a library, it has also lead to an ad-hoc group of data recyclers. This includes the analysis and annotation of primary datasets, the assembly of secondary datasets used for purposes such as novel comparative studies, and the production of tertiary datasets such as visualizations or a set of mathematical abstractions. While the more traditional library model has been excellent for accessibility, a formal model of utility and a lack of explicitly-stated standards have limited the potential of reusing data. Given this complexity, it has become clear that more formal methods for transforming these public data is required to sustain practice and even help to establish a new discipline of data science biology. Our project will proceed by promoting an educational curriculum, developing a data reuse infrastructure, and engaging in community-building efforts. This will provide a strong foundation for a number of new initiatives, bolster the practice of open science, and promote positive attitudes with respect to data sharing and alternative uses and transformation of primary data.  

### Project Description:  
This project formalizes a conceptual framework of data reuse (recycling) that will serve to enrich Open Science practice and the Open Science community at large. This will involve an educational initiative, the development of a formal data reuse infrastructure, and a community-building component. The entire project is proposed to last 10 months, and its components are ordered in terms of priority:  

1) Educational initiative (first 25% of project; time to completion, 2 months): the first part of our project will involve educating the broader scientific community about data reuse and the potential for scientific discovery. The curriculum will be tailored to encourage data reuse, data integration, and development of cognate methodologies. This is in part to counteract the perception that data reuse and data sharing constitutes parasitism. But this also provides a form of legitimacy and advocacy for new scholars who seek to ask data-intensive questions.  

2) Infrastructure Development (second 25% of project; time to completion, 2 months): the second part of our project involves developing best practices, an architecture for data transformation from primary data collection to analysis of a tertiary dataset, and a public instance of an accessible exemplar repository. During the project timespan, this infrastructure will be limited to developing best practices and mapping them to a simple version-controlled repository. Long-term, development will involve scaling up to more sophisticated computational interfaces.  

3) Community-building (last 50% of project; time to completion, 4 months): the final part of our project will be focused on engaging in community activities that concentrate expertise and provide avenues for new scholars. Part of this would be implementing educational materials and best practices.     

In general, these components will be addressed sequentially. However, work is ongoing for all of these components, particularly in laying the groundwork for infrastructure development and a data reuse curriculum. The eventual goal is to have an interactive architecture that codifies potential instances of data reuse and provides links to educational and community resources for each component. Specific outcomes for the project will be as follows:  

1) Open Course on Data Reuse. An open course on data reuse is in the process of being developed with feedback from The Carpentries and the eLife Early Career Advisory group communities. Curriculum development (based on the concept of the “minimum viable lesson”) will continue to be developed with feedback from the open science community.  

2) Build Infrastructure. This will include developing a formal architecture that specifies community standards for each component of the reuse architecture (primary, secondary, tertiary), how to manage a version-controlled repository, and how to engage a distributed community.  

3) Community advancement. Initial community-building efforts will involve digital engagement using collaborative mechanisms (Hackathon events and Slack teams). As the project proceeds, efforts will be highlighted in the form of a preprint, public lectures, a Wiki to host best practices, and a GUI to present the materials. This will codify the attributes described in Step 2, and will hopefully encourage adoption and spread awareness among a broader audience.  

### Indicators:  
Three indicators will be used for assessing the efficacy of these efforts. The first is connecting technological evangelism with artifact production. While use of this architecture for a wide range of academic and non-academic projects will be encouraged, adoption can also be measured through the production of artifacts such as datasets, visualizations, papers, and interactive notebooks. Thus, one indicator is a database of digital identifiers (doi) that point to artifacts from different parts of the proposed architecture.  

A second indicator is a measure of lesson plan effectiveness. This can be done through traditional forms of evaluation such as a certification exam. An alternative means of evaluating and even encouraging lesson plan engagement is by offering microcredentials for different parts of the roadmap. For example, a microcredential would be developed in the form of a digital badge for secondary data handling. This digital badge would require the learner to engage in a number of practical activities which demonstrate their competence in a straightforward manner.  

A third indicator of our success will be in advancing community events. These include asynchronous virtual collaboration, virtual events, and physical events. One easy indicator is the assessment of contributions to the project Wiki in terms of authorship and quality. Another indicator involves blog posts or interactive notebooks that grow out of project-sponsored Hackathons or activity within Slack channels. Eventually, physical meetings or even formal workshops might result from these efforts.  

### Community:  
The immediate relevance of this project includes all scientists in the physical, biological, and social sciences. This community may expand in the future to all consumers of datasets, with additional relevance to municipal, financial, or geographic data. User interface design (access to community materials through a website with easy to understand content) will serve as a means to make the data reuse architecture more accessible to casual visitors and less technically-oriented community members. The community itself will be centered around a web portal and virtual community activities such as interactive chats, community standups, regular Skype meetups, and lectures. 

Managing interaction itself will be based on the number of participants, community interest, and the need to focus on particular issues arising from collaborative efforts. The community source model of development will be utilized to encourage community participation. This will consist of providing immediate social capital, potential financial rewards for contributory efforts, and ownership stakes (in terms of licensing) offered to the most persistent contributors. Longer term community efforts will involve managing content from groups implementing the infrastructure, documentation for common issues, and compiling updated versions of the architecture.

#### Number of people this will benefit:  
In the short term, this project will not only benefit Informaticians, but also practitioners of data analysis interested in the intersection of data and open science. Initial community-building efforts will provide an community on the order of 50-1000 participants. Once the project builds credibility among its intended audience, subsequent recommendation and promotion will in the long term potentially benefit on the order of 1000-100000 participants.

#### Geographic Focus:  
The geographic focus is global relevance, but initially to English-speaking scientists and science students across the world with an internet connection. There is a potential to translate best practices and educational materials into other languages, modes of learning with broad interest (such as gamification), and interactive applications relevant to non-scientists.  

### Challenges:  
There are challenges involved in building and sustaining an initial community, and scaling up community involvement in the range of 100-1000 participants. In terms of establishing an initial community, the plan is recruit community participants through educational opportunities. This includes contributing to lesson plans as well as learning opportunities. Once the project is established, the digital footprint will be used to build credibility as a niche resource for the Data Science and Informatics communities. The applicant has done this to an extent through an existing project called [DevoWorm](http://devoworm.weebly.com), which has built up credibility and scientific resources related to *Caenorhabditis elegans* development and theoretical biology more generally. As the project scales up with a wider variety of participants and topical perspectives, there will be an increasing need to consider ethical issues such as data privacy and intellectual property issues as additional components of the architecture.

### Partners:  
Partners include collaborators associated with the [Orthogonal Research and Education Laboratory](https://orthogonal-research.weebly.com/), [eLife Early Career Advisory Group](https://elifesciences.org/inside-elife/912b0679/early-career-advisory-group-elife-welcomes-150-ambassadors-of-good-practice-in-science), and the [OpenWorm Foundation](http://openworm.org/). The proposed framework will be developed using the resources of the Orthogonal Research and Education Laboratory. Community-building and feedback will be provided by members of the eLife Early Career Advisory Group and the OpenWorm Foundation.  

### Working Open:  
We plan on being radically open, providing full transparency to all educational and roadmap components. The same holds true for community outputs, as artifacts such as blogposts and digital identifiable artifacts will be hosted in the same set of repositories. We advocate for using version-controlled platforms such as [Github](http://github.com) and [Open Science Framework](http://osf.io), depending on whether the content is code-intensive or requiring a digital identifier (doi). Additionally, social platforms such as [Badgelist](http://badgelist.com) and YouTube for microcredential delivery and public lecture/tutorial distribution, respectively.  

### Field Survey:  
Much work has been done in the Biological Sciences, Social Sciences, and other fields on providing access to what are referred to as secondary data and public use data. Often these resources are curated using either a set of links on a webpage, or as a static repository with minimal standards for presenting data. One example from the Biological Science is [GenBank](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/), which hosts raw data from experimental groups with metadata that describes experimental context. While this is merely acceptable from a data reuse perspective, it does not provide a vision for unlocking the potential of such datasets. Secondary data also comes with a preconceived set of cultural notions. In some circles, secondary data use is considered to be parasitic, and not equivalent to primary data. A formal architecture for integrating and providing value to data reuse would help to change these values towards those more aligned with the realities of open science.  

### Status:  
Currently, there is one person [(Dr. Bradly Alicea)](https://bradly-alicea.weebly.com/) involved in the infrastructural, educational, and community efforts. As the initiative grows, Dr. Alicea will serve as the project coordinator and facilitator. The basic formula of primary, secondary, and tertiary dataset use is exemplified in the DevoWorm group. This roadmap is featured in [educational materials](https://github.com/Orthogonal-Research-Lab/Module-II-reusefulness-of-data) currently being developed through the Orthogonal Research and Educational Laboratory. A DevoWorm-related public interface called [DevoZoo](https://devoworm.github.io/devozoo.htm) has already been developed to put a face on a combination of processed and raw image data served on a Github repository.  

### Sustainability:  
Once developed, this project will be made sustainable through community contributions as well as annual auditing by the primary investigator and main contributors. All materials and links to community resources will be committed to a centralized web presence (website managed by Orthogonal Research and Education Laboratory). Contributed materials will be edited for accuracy and consistency with existing materials. Regular updates will be highlighted as a series of public releases. While not exactly like the public release model used in software development, each version will consist of an updated architecture, updates to educational content, and updates to public outreach materials (publications and lectures that advocate our approach to data reuse). Mass customization of architectures for particular research groups (versions of the original architecture) will be encouraged and made available to the entire community. Regularly scheduled virtual events (Hackathons, lecture series) will sustain community engagement, and may be coupled with physical meetups or workshops in the future.  

### Prior Collaboration:  
The proposed data reuse framework has been developed informally through previous interactions with the OpenWorm Foundation, particularly drawing on work from the DevoWorm group. The educational component has been developed as an individual project that has received feedback as part of both a Carpentries mentoring group and an eLife Early Career Advisory group team.
