### Data Reuse Initiative Survey
The goal of this survey is to gauge the behaviors and efficacy of researchers in the area of data reuse. We approach this as a matter of both data production and consumption. Production refers to generating and analyzing primary data, while consumption involves the further utilization of processed primary data.  

This survey should take about 15-20 minutes to complete, and is from the Data Reuse Initiative (eLife Ambassadors Program). For questions or concerns, please contact Bradly Alicea (balicea@openworm.org), Bhavik Nathwani (bhavik.nathwani@wyss.harvard.edu), or Marije Verhage (m.l.verhage@vu.nl).

#### Section 1: General information about data production/consumption habits
1. In what area(s) of study do you have data analysis expertise (select all that apply)?

Molecular/Cell Biology
Organismal/Behavioral Biology
Physiology/Biomedical Science
Physics and Chemistry
Psychology/Social Science
Computational Science
Engineering
Other Domains of Knowledge

2. What best describes the data you work with for research and related purposes?

I exclusively use data generated by me or my research group
I exclusively use data generated by other researchers or research groups
A combination of primary and secondary data (both of the above)

3. If you are a producer of data, what type(s) of data do you generate (select all that apply)?

Numeric Measurements
Genomic Sequencing
Text analysis
Survey
Microscopy/medical imaging
Audio/Video
Other
I do not produce primary data

4. What type(s) of secondary data, generated by colleagues or publicly available, would you most likely consider using (select all that apply)?

Numeric Measurements
Genomic Sequencing
Text analysis
Survey
Microscopy/medical imaging
Audio/Video
Other
I would not use any form of secondary data

5. In which of the following cases are you most likely to seek out publicly available data (select all that apply)?

Lack of data locally (e.g. hypothesis-testing)
Augment an existing analysis (e.g. as a control or alternate condition)
As a training set for a computational model
As a standard or benchmark (e.g. reference)
Other

#### Section 2: Personal data consumption/production habits
6. How many years of experience do you have in conducting research?

Less than 1
1-3
4-6
7-10
Over 10

7. Thinking about your data analysis experience, is your experience largely in what capacity (select all that apply)?

The same type of data within a single discipline
The same type of data across multiple disciplines
Interdisciplinary (different types of data from multiple disciplines)
Non-academic data analysis
Both academic and non-academic data analysis

8. Where do the data you use come from (select all that apply)?

Publicly available data sets (from a repository)
Scraped from the internet
I/my team collect the data
Third-party collection (from collaborators)
Third-party collection (from vendors)

9. What format type(s) do you use to either produce or consume data (select all that apply, specific file extensions are only used as examples)?

Spreadsheet (.xls)
Comma-delimited format (.csv)
Encoded document format (.xml, .doc)
Data-interchange format (.json)
Method-specific format (.fastq)
Audio (.mp3), Video (.mov), or Image (.tif) specific formats
Other format

9a. If your answer for Question 9 is "other format", please specify 

Long Answer: ------

10. Do you have practical experience with any of the following concepts, and what is your degree of familiarity or expertise (check all that apply)?

1. Metadata
2. Version Control
3. Data Repository or Archive
4. File Format Conversion
5. Data Annotation
6. File Sharing
7. Open Access License
8. Machine Readable Format
9. Data Commons
10. Data Ontology
11. Data Attributes
12. Controlled Vocabularies
13. Statistical Quality Checklist
14. Data Standards
15. Data Thesaurus

Answers:
Have working experience, expert
Have working experience, novice
No working experience, familiarity
No working experience, no familiarity

#### Section 3: Data consumption/production habits during an average year
11. During an average year, estimate what percentage of time you (or your research group) spend on curating your data and/or code for reuse?

Never
Less than 10%
10-30%
30-50%
50-80%
More than 80%

12. During an average year,estimate what percentage of time you (or your research group) spends on finding secondary data in any form?

Never
Less than 10%
10-30%
30-50%
50-80%
More than 80%

13. During an average year, estimate what percentage of time you (or your research group) spends on building and modeling data?

Never
Less than 10%
10-30%
30-50%
50-80%
More than 80%

14. During an average year, estimate what percentage of time you (or your research group) spends  on maintaining (collecting, labeling, cleaning and organizing) data?

Not applicable
Less than 10%
30-50%
50-80%
More than 80%

15. During an average year, estimate what percentage of time you (or your research group) spends on using data to train models?

Not applicable
Less than 10%
10-30%
30-50%
50-80%
More than 80%

#### Section 4: Personal experience with data production
16. Do you use a code book or convention for naming variables?

Yes
No

17. In your experience, have you found the time required to properly annotate variables and files to be a barrier to sharing data?

Yes
No
Not Applicable

18. What improvements to the curation of secondary data would make it easier for you to use shared data?

Long Answer: -----

19. Are you or your research group required to share data by your funding agency?

Yes
No

20. Have you or your research group ever practiced a data embargo? If so, what is the length of the embargo? Please provide the best answer.

No
Yes, less than 6 months
Yes, longer than 6 months
Yes, until all related papers have been published (not time-dependent)

21. Do you utilize all or part of the FAIR standards?

Yes
No
I am not familiar with the FAIR standards

#### Section 5: Tendencies in Data Production and Consumption
22. What method(s) have you used to share data in the past (select all that apply)?

By personal request
Personal web server
Using a general-purpose repository (e.g. Zenodo)
Using a discipline-specific public repository (e.g. GenBank)
Using an institutional repository
Other

23. What is your preferred method for sharing data (please select one)?

By personal request
Personal web server
Using a secure repository (e.g. Github, Zenodo)
Using a discipline-specific public repository (e.g. GenBank, Dryad)
Using an institutional repository
Other

24. If you have formally published a data set (data that has been assigned a doi or accession number), what form(s) of credit have you received (select all that apply)?

As a line on your CV/resume
Used for tenure/promotion
To satisfy funder mandates
Received social capital for creating a community asset
Receive citations from other researchers
I/we do not receive credit for publishing data
Other

25. Have you used open data sets (acquired from a secondary source) in the following contexts?

1. Pilot study
2. Hypothesis-testing
3. Validation of Experimental Results
4. Meta-analysis
5. Computational Study
6. Other Reasons (not listed)

Potential Answers:
Yes
No

26. If someone shares data with you, how likely are you to reciprocate in the future?

1 Not likely at all
2
3
4
5 Very likely

27. If you were to share data, how likely do you believe it would be reciprocated?

1 Not likely at all
2
3
4
5 Very likely

28. Which of the following incentives would induce you to share a data set?

1. Easy to implement standards
2. Publication credit 
3. Ability to automate dataset preparation
4. Financial compensation
5. Control over who accesses the data set

Potential Answers:
Not likely at all
Somewhat unlikely
Somewhat likely
Very likely

#### Section 6: Personal Background
29. If you are a researcher, what sector do you work in?

Academic
Industry
Government
Other
I am not a researcher

30. What is your job title?

Student
Postdoctoral
Professor
Research Associate
Researcher (non-academic)
Independent investigator
Other

31. In what nation do you primarily conduct your research?

Long Answer: ------
